=== PAGE 1 ===
.
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3711852
.
.
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
JIA-MING LU, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Beijing, China
.
GENG-CHEN CAO, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Beijing, China
.
CHENFENG LI
.
SHI-MIN HU, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Beijing, China
.
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
.
PDF Download
3711852.pdf
27 February 2026
Total Citations: 1
Total Downloads: 747
.
.
Published: 28 January 2025
Online AM: 09 January 2025
Accepted: 12 December 2024
Revised: 15 October 2024
Received: 21 August 2023
.
.
Citation in BibTeX format
.
.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Volume 44, Issue 1 (February 2025)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3711852
EISSN: 1557-7368
.

=== PAGE 2 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
JIA-MING LU, BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
GENG-CHEN CAO, BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
CHENFENG LI, Zienkiewicz Institute for Modelling, Data and AI, Swansea University Bay Campus, Swansea, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
SHI-MIN HU, BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Fig. 1. (a) A ceramic plate dropped on a hard floor and broken into pieces. Our simulation captures a great level of details using only 219K particles, with
a 2.4x speedup over the state-of-the-art method. (b) A piece of knitted fabric being torn apart, demonstrating our algorithm’s ability to handle extreme
deformations and material failure in textiles, with a 3.3x speedup over the state-of-the-art method.
This article proposes a novel simulation approach that combines im-
plicit integration with the Bonded Discrete Element Method (BDEM) to
achieve faster, more stable, and more accurate fracture simulation. The
new method leverages the efficiency of implicit schemes in dynamic sim-
ulation and the versatility of BDEM in fracture modeling. Specifically, an
optimization-based integrator for BDEM is introduced and combined with
a manifold optimization approach to accelerate the solution process of
the quaternion-constrained system. Our comparative experiments indicate
that our method offers better scale consistency and more realistic colli-
sion effects than finite element method and material point method frag-
Authors’ Contact Information: Jia-Ming Lu, BNRist, Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, Beijing, China; e-mail: jaimeyzzz@
outlook.com; Geng-Chen Cao, BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technol-
ogy, Tsinghua University, Beijing, Beijing, China; e-mail: cgc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.
cn; Chenfeng Li, Zienkiewicz Institute for Modelling, Data and AI, Swansea Univer-
sity Bay Campus, Swansea, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; e-
mail: c.f.li@swansea.ac.uk; Shi-min Hu, BNRist, Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; e-mail: shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy other-
wise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 0730-0301/2025/01-ART9
https://doi.org/10.1145/3711852
mentation approaches. Additionally, our method achieves a computational
speedup of 2.1 to 9.8 times over explicit BDEM methods.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Physical simulation;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Discrete element method, fracture sim-
ulation, optimization-based integrator, manifold optimization
ACM Reference Format:
Jia-Ming Lu, Geng-Chen Cao, Chenfeng Li, and Shi-min Hu. 2025.
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimiza-
tion. ACM Trans. Graph. 44, 1, Article 9 (January 2025), 17 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3711852
1
Introduction
Fracture and damage occur to all materials, and they represent a
fundamental type of interaction in virtual environments (Figure 1).
As an important topic in physics-based simulation, fracture mod-
eling is a challenging task due to the complex underlying physical
processes. The ubiquity of fractures in real life sets a high standard
for plausible results to satisfy human perception. To date, most sim-
ulation methods for materials are based on the continuum theory,
which have limited capacity in capturing fracture phenomena. The
Bonded Discrete Element Method (BDEM) can better simulate
fractures [Lu et al. 2021]. One of the most significant challenges
in fracture simulation is keeping the error of internal forces under
control while allowing an acceptable error rate in fracture prop-
agation. For simulation methods based on the continuum theory,
the accuracy in stresses is typically much poorer than the accuracy
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 3 ===
9:2
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
in displacements, making it hard if not impossible to manage the
simulation error during fracture propagation. The BDEM does not
have this limitation, as its stress and displacement are not hard-
wired through differential operators.
However, solving BDEM systems is complicated by the stiff na-
ture of the unit length constraint in quaternion systems, and it
becomes more challenging for such materials as rope and cloth
due to the added complexity of shear stiffness. The collision stiff-
ness in discrete element simulations is another major challenge,
as it can significantly increase the number of Newton iterations
required. These issues are prevalent and well recognized in BDEM
simulations [André et al. 2012; Nguyen et al. 2021]. Implicit inte-
grators are widely used in computer graphics to accelerate the effi-
ciency of dynamic simulations, where the backward Euler scheme
is the most prevalent method [Baraff and Witkin 1998; Hirota et al.
2001; Liu et al. 2013; Martin et al. 2011; Volino and Magnenat-
Thalmann 2001]. Other integrators, such as the implicit-explicit
method [Eberhardt et al. 2000; Stern and Grinspun 2009] and ex-
ponential integrators [Chen et al. 2017; Michels et al. 2014], have
also received significant attention. Recent work used a variational
integrator to model the inter-granule contact [De Klerk et al. 2022].
However, none of these well-established implicit schemes is effec-
tive for BDEM.
To address this challenge, we introduce an optimization-based
integrator to reformulate BDEM and combine it with a manifold
optimization approach to deliver faster, more stable, and more ac-
curate fracture simulations. Our approach leverages the strength
of BDEM in fracture modeling while achieving superior computa-
tional efficiency with the resulting implicit solution scheme. Our
experiments show that without loss of accuracy, the proposed ap-
proach is more efficient than explicit BDEM methods. The main
contributions include the following:
— A stable optimization-based integrator suitable for implicit
BDEM is formulated, and it allows large timesteps.
— A manifold optimization approach for BDEM is introduced
to speed up the solution of quaternion-constrained systems.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly
recaps related works in fracture simulation and the Discrete El-
ement Method (DEM). The main body of work is presented
in Section 3 and Section 4, which respectively present the
optimization-based integration for BDEM and the manifold opti-
mization approach to accelerate the solution process. More imple-
mentation details are provided in Section 5, followed by results and
discussions in Section 6. Finally, concluding remarks are made in
Section 7.
2
Related Works
Fracture Simulation. Fracture simulation is an important topic in
computer graphics, owing to the ubiquity of fracture phenomena
in real life. A number of non-physical methods have been proposed
to produce crack patterns [Bao et al. 2007; Hellrung et al. 2009;
Müller et al. 2013; Raghavachary 2002; Schvartzman and Otaduy
2014; Su et al. 2009; Zheng and James 2010], whereas physics-based
methods are more accurate and have become the preferred ap-
proach for fracture simulation. Until recently, the Finite Element
Method (FEM) is the most widely used physics-based technique
for fracture simulation [Koschier et al. 2014; Müller et al. 2001;
O’Brien and Hodgins 1999; Pfaff et al. 2014; Wicke et al. 2010].
Other physics-based methods include XFEM (eXtended FEM) [Chi-
talu et al. 2020; Kaufmann et al. 2009], the Boundary Element
Method (BEM) [Hahn and Wojtan 2015, 2016; Zhu et al. 2015],
the mesh-less method [Pauly et al. 2005], peridynamics [Chen et al.
2018], and the Material Point Method (MPM) [Fan et al. 2022;
Wolper et al. 2020, 2019]. Each of these methods has its own pros
and cons and is suitable for different fracture scenarios. Besides
addressing underlying physics, accurately capturing fracture sur-
faces is crucial for realistic visual effects in fracture propagation.
For FEM fracture simulation, methods like adaptive remeshing
[Chen et al. 2014; Koschier et al. 2014; Pfaff et al. 2014; Wicke et al.
2010], duplicate elements [Molino et al. 2004], and sub-elements
[Nesme et al. 2009; Wojtan and Turk 2008] are employed to cap-
ture and prevent poor-quality elements. Explicit surface methods
[Koschier et al. 2017], post-processing techniques [Chitalu et al.
2020; Kaufmann et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2019], level-set meth-
ods [Hahn and Wojtan 2015], and mesh-based methods [Chitalu
et al. 2020; Sifakis et al. 2007; Zhu et al. 2015] offer alternative ap-
proaches for accurately representing fracture surfaces.
Discrete Element Methods. Introduced by Cundall and Strack
for solving problems in rock mechanics [Cundall 1971; Cun-
dall and Strack 1979], DEM is widely used in engineering for
modeling granular materials. The DEM has also been adopted
in computer graphics for visual effects involving granules and
particles [Alduán et al. 2009; Bell et al. 2005; Rungjiratananon et al.
2008; Yue et al. 2018]. To simulate continuum media, Potyondy
and Cundall [2004] extended the DEM to form the BDEM, and
since then it has seen growing adoption in various engineering
applications. Examples include the work of André et al. [2012],
where a cohesive bond model was used to represent continuum
objects, and the work of Nguyen et al. [2021], where a plastic
cohesive bond was used to simulate ductile fractures. The BDEM
was introduced to the computer graphics community in prior
work [Lu et al. 2021], and it was proven to be robust and flexible
for producing realistic visual effects involving fractures. As far
as plausible visual effects are concerned, the main limitation of
BDEM fracture simulation is its computational efficiency, due to
the need for small timesteps in the simulation.
Simulation with Rotation. Different from FEM, where the de-
grees of freedom of motion are defined on a set of points/nodes
and include only translations, the degrees of freedom for DEM are
defined on rigid spheres, which include both translational and ro-
tational degrees of freedom. The explicit inclusion of rotation as
part of element states is a major advantage for DEMs to represent
the deformation and motion of real-world objects. There are other
methods that also explicitly account for the rotational motion. A
prominent and well-established category within this domain is
the simulation of rigid body motion, which has been subjected
to extensive exploration for several decades [Baraff 1989; Bender
et al. 2014; Hahn 1988; Stewart 2000]. Recent endeavors in rigid
body simulation include the employment of the extended posi-
tion based dynamics method for solving the motion of rigid bodies
[Müller et al. 2020], differentiable rigid contact models [Geilinger
et al. 2020], and the modeling of rigid body motion and colli-
sion resolution through the formulation of incremental potential
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 4 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:3
[Ferguson et al. 2021]. Certainly, in addition to rigid body simula-
tions, the incorporation of rotation as a degree of freedom is also
utilized in various other methods. One such method uses parti-
cles with orientation [Müller and Chentanez 2011], but this geo-
metric approach does not capture basic physical concepts such as
momentum and stress, which can limit its ability in producing re-
alistic visual effects. Another example is rod elements for model-
ing slender objects. The discrete elastic rod approach [Bergou et al.
2008] was used to compute rod curvature, whereas Cosserat rods
were used in the work of Kugelstadt and Schömer [2016] and Soler
et al. [2018] to model complex bending and torsion effects. The rod
elements approach is effective for slender and flexible structures,
such as ropes and fibers, but they are less effective for simulating
generic objects.
Optimization-Based Integrator. In physics-based simulations,
the resolution of complex nonlinear equations is often required,
which can lead to inefficient and unstable solutions due to their in-
herent complexity. An integrator based on energy optimization is
a method designed to enhance the efficiency and stability of solv-
ing nonlinear equations. This approach has been applied to var-
ious types of computational problems, including fluid dynamics
[Weiler et al. 2016], crowd simulation [Karamouzas et al. 2017],
and elastic bodies [Fratarcangeli et al. 2016; Gast et al. 2015; Mar-
tin et al. 2011; Wang and Yang 2016] and nonlinear materials [Kee
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2019; Löschner et al. 2020]. Projective dynamics
represent a class of optimization-based methods for solving con-
strained systems, capable of rapidly resolving a diverse array of
materials [Bouaziz et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2013, 2016; Narain et al.
2016; Weiler et al. 2016]. Incremental potential is also a class of
methods based on energy optimization, which has recently been
employed to handle collisions between various objects [Ferguson
et al. 2021; Lan et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020a, b]. By introducing the
interior point method to resolve impacts, it consistently achieves
interpenetration-free outcomes. In our work, akin to the approach
presented by Ferguson et al. [2021], we have derived an integrator
with rotational degrees of freedom in an energy-optimized form.
In contrast to the complex formulation originally targeted at rigid
body simulation, our integrator has been specifically tailored for
the BDEM system, resulting in a significantly streamlined solution
that achieves efficient computation.
3
Implicit BDEM
A significant difference between BDEM and other approaches is
the direct consideration of rotational degrees of freedom as sys-
tem variables. Previous methods solve BDEM systems using ex-
plicit formulations that store rotation status as quaternions, Euler
angles or axis angles, and compute torques and angular velocities
explicitly to alter the rotation status of discrete elements. In im-
plicit formulations, position and rotation states cannot be explic-
itly updated, and forces or torques are often implicit or invisible
during the solution process. To form an implicit BDEM scheme, it
requires a different formulation.
Solving generic nonlinear equations are unstable, and a promis-
ing strategy to tackle this challenge is transforming the nonlinear
simulation problem into a nonlinear optimization problem that is
easier to solve [Gast et al. 2015]. Optimization-based integrators
are effective in improving the stability and convergence speed of
nonlinear solution processes. Considering the BDEM system, a di-
rect idea is that we formulate the solution of motion equations with
rotational degrees of freedom into an energy minimization form to
achieve a fast and stable integrator. In conventional rigid body so-
lutions, due to the introduction of rotational degrees of freedom,
the mass matrix M in the extended motion equations is varies with
the motion state [Geilinger et al. 2020; Liu and Jain 2012]. There-
fore, we cannot directly write the extended motion equations in
the form of energy minimization. In pursuit of an improved solu-
tion form, akin to the approach detailed in the work of Kane et al.
[2000], we have re-derived the motion equation for BDEM based
on quaternions. We have discovered that, leveraging the inherent
characteristics of BDEM, we can ultimately arrive at an exceed-
ingly succinct formulation for optimization-based integrator.
3.1
Optimization-Based Integrator
Building upon Hamiltonian mechanics for quaternion-based rigid
body dynamics, we present a simplified computational framework
for BDEM simulations of spherical particles. Our key contribution
is the derivation of a constant mass matrix formulation that main-
tains solution convergence while eliminating the need for rotation
state-dependent mass matrices. The complete mathematical foun-
dation is presented in Appendix C. Our formulation yields a block-
diagonal extended mass matrix Ms:
Ms =
mI3
8
5mr2I4

,
(1)
where m is the particle mass, r is the sphere radius, and I3 and I4
are identity matrices of dimensions 3 and 4, respectively.
This constant mass matrix enables us to express the dynamics as
a discrete variational principle, leading to the following optimiza-
tion formulation:
Φ(xi+1) =
1
2Δt2 (xi+1 −ˆz)T Ms(xi+1 −ˆz) + V
xi+1 + xi
2

,
(2)
where Δt is the timestep size, xi represents the system state at
timestep i (including both position and quaternion components),
and V denotes the potential energy. The auxiliary variables ˆx and
ˆz are defined as
ˆx = 2xi −xi−1
ˆz = ˆx −1
2M−1
s Δt2∇V
xi−1 + xi
2

.
(3)
These variables are computed from known states at previous
timesteps. The system evolution is then determined by solving the
constrained optimization problem:
xi+1 = arg min
x
Φ(x)
s.t.
C(x) = 0,
(4)
where C(x) represents the quaternion unit length constraint (see
Appendix A). This variational integrator, a symplectic integrator
with second-order accuracy, is now ready for our simulation and
compatible with our following manifold optimization approach.
However, to further reduce computational costs, we introduce an
approximation in our experiments to trade off the computational
speed and simulation accuracy. We approximate both ∇V ( xi+1+xi
2
)
and ∇V ( xi−1+xi
2
) with ∇V (xi+1). This approximation, while reduc-
ing the integrator to first-order accuracy, maintains compatibility
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 5 ===
9:4
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
Fig. 2. The experimental results of our method on a chocolate drop impact simulation. The figure illustrates the moment when a chocolate drop hits the
ground and cracks into several pieces and small fragments. The simulation shows the effectiveness of our approach in accurately modeling high-speed
object collisions and fracture phenomena.
with our manifold optimization approach. Empirical comparisons
reveal that the primary drawback is slightly increased damping, a
tradeoff for improved computational efficiency. The modified form,
similar to the implicit Euler method, is as follows:
1
Δt2 Ms(xi+1 −ˆx) + ∇V (xi+1) = 0,
(5)
with the corresponding objective function,
Φ(xi+1) =
1
2Δt2 (xi+1 −ˆx)T Ms(xi+1 −ˆx) + V (xi+1).
(6)
Note that this formulation bears a striking resemblance to its
counterpart without rotational degrees of freedom. This similarity
might raise questions about the treatment of rotation-related
terms. To address this potential source of confusion and pro-
vide a comprehensive understanding, we present an alternative
derivation with a detailed exposition of the rotational dynamics
in Appendix B.
3.2
Potential Energy in BDEM
Now we require only the specification of a potential function to
solve the BDEM system. In a setup where two vertices xi={pi,qi }
and xj={pj,qj } are bonded together, the deformation of the bond
can be decomposed into four forms: stretch, shear, bend, and twist,
akin to the form presented in our prior work [Lu et al. 2021]. It is
straightforward to derive the bond energy with these four defor-
mation types:
V = Vstretch + Vshear + Vbendtwist.
(7)
Stretch. The stretch energy of a bond can be modeled using a
simple spring model and expressed as follows:
Vstretch = 1
2kn(∥pi −pj ∥−l0)2,
(8)
where kn = ES
l0 , l0 is the original bond length, E is Young’s mod-
ulus, and S is the bond’s cross-sectional area, with S = π( ri+rj
2
)2,
using the radii ri and rj of two bonded elements.
Shear. The rotation of two elements can be decomposed into a
common rotational component and a differential rotational compo-
nent. As elucidated in prior work [Lu et al. 2021], the shear energy
is modeled by the variation of the common rotational component
relative to the rest state of the bond. To extract the common rota-
tion, the equationqc = (qi +qj)/∥qi +qj ∥is used, whered = qc ⊙d0
represents the current direction. The corresponding energy can be
expressed as
Vshear = 1
2ktθ2,
(9)
where θ =

d0,dq

denotes the angle between the bond’s initial
direction d0 and current direction d. The shear stiffness is kt =
GS/l0, where G represents the material’s shear modulus.
Bend and Twist. The bend and twist energy of discrete elements
can be defined as the difference in their rotational component. It is
important to note that the stiffness of bend and twist have distinct
relationships with material properties, thus requiring separate de-
composition of the two types of rotations. The difference of quater-
nion, expressed in the form of Gl(qj)qi, can be transformed to the
local frame via the rotation matrix R0 = Gl(q0)Gr (q0), where q0
is the rotation between d0 and {1, 0, 0}. The resulting vector can
then be represented as t = R0Gl(qj)qi. With the aid of the stretch
and shear stiffness matrix denoted as K, the energy form can be
expressed using
Vbendtwist = 1
2tT Kt.
(10)
The stiffness matrix is defined by
K = 1
l0
	

GJ
EI
EI


,
(11)
where I = πr4
0/4 and J = πr4
0/2 are the second moments of area
for bending and twisting, respectively.
3.3
Fracture Criteria
In our prior study [Lu et al. 2021], the tensile and shear stresses
within the bond in BDEM are calculated as follows:
σ = ∥Fn∥
S
+ ∥Mb ∥r0
I
(12)
τ = ∥Fs ∥
S
+ ∥Mt ∥r0
J
,
(13)
where Fn and Fs represent the normal and shear forces acting
on the bond, respectively. The quantities |Mb | and |Mt | indicate
the magnitudes of the bending moments about the bond’s normal
and transverse axes, respectively, and S, I, and J denote the cross-
sectional area, second moment of area, and polar moment of area of
the bond’s cross section, respectively. If the stress within the bond
exceeds the respective strengths, i.e., σ > σc or τ > τc with σc and
τc representing the tensile and shear strengths, the bond breaks.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 6 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:5
Fig. 3. A ceramic plate dropped on a hard floor and broken into pieces. Our simulation captures highly detailed fractures using only 219K particles, with a
2.4x speedup over the state-of-the-art method.
In the explicit method, forces and torques are calculated directly,
thus allowing the aforementioned fracture criteria to be readily
computed. For our implicit method, where forces and torques are
not computed directly, in order to employ the same fracture crite-
ria, it is necessary to calculate the forces within the implicit setting.
To achieve this, we have utilized the following equations:
Fn = ∇pVstretch
(14)
Fs = ∇pVshear
(15)
∥Mb ∥= ∥⟨Kt,e1⟩e1 + ⟨Kt,e2⟩e2∥
(16)
∥Mt ∥= ∥⟨Kt,e0⟩e0∥,
(17)
where K and t represent the stiffness matrix and rotation vector in
the bending and twisting potential equation given by Equation (10).
In our experiments, we have found that this approach works effec-
tively, yielding results that are nearly identical to those produced
by the explicit method.
3.4
Element Packing
In the domain of discrete element simulations, the concept of pack-
ing is analogous to the discretization process in continuum meth-
ods. Common packing techniques employed in discrete element
simulations include random close packing and hexagonal close
packing. For engineering applications that aim to accurately simu-
late material properties, random close packing combined with cal-
ibration is a frequently utilized approach. For the sake of simplic-
ity in our application, we have employed hexagonal close packing.
Our experiments have revealed that even with this most basic pack-
ing method, it is possible to effectively capture rich fracture details
without introducing visually discernible artifacts that might result
from overly regular patterns.
4
Manifold Optimization
The preceding optimization approach generally improves the
solution stability, but to solve it efficiently remains a challenge
due to the quaternion constraint in Equation (54). Our experi-
ments have revealed that traditional methods such as the penalty
method and the Lagrange multiplier method perform poorly. In
this work, we present a manifold optimization scheme, where the
quaternion constraint is represented as a hypersphere enabling
more effective optimization search on a manifold. Experimental
results demonstrate that our new approach significantly improves
the efficiency and accuracy of the BDEM solution compared to
previous methods.
The manifold optimization approach [Boumal 2023] replaces
the constrained optimization problem on Rn with an uncon-
strained optimization problem on a specific manifold M. In our
approach, we utilize the second-order manifold optimization and
employ a nullspace operator to further reduce the number of
unknowns in the system. To better explain this solution process,
we also introduce the first-order manifold optimization and
compare its performance with our more advanced approach. To
facilitate subsequent discussions, we establish specific nomen-
clature to differentiate functions defined on the full space from
those on the manifold. The objective function is represented as
¯f in the original Euclidean space and as f in the new manifold
M, such that ¯f |M = f . In our scenario, the manifold is defined
as M = n
i=1 R3 ⊗S3, where n denotes the number of particles.
Additionally, grad f and Hess f refer to the gradient and Hessian
in the manifold space, whereas grad ¯f and Hess ¯f pertain to the
gradient and Hessian in the full space. The subscript p denotes
the R3 space, and the subscript q denotes the S3 space.
4.1
First-Order Manifold Optimization
ALGORITHM 1: First-Order Manifold Optimization
Require: Initial guess x0, termination threshold ϵ
1: while true do
2:
Compute the grad f (xk) on the manifold M.
3:
if ∥grad f (xk)∥< ϵ then
4:
return xk ∈M
5:
end if
6:
Use descent direction −grad f (xk) with manifold line
search step α to update xk+1 ←xk −α grad f (xk) on the
manifold M.
7:
Project xk+1 to the manifold M.
8:
k ←k + 1
9: end while
The first-order manifold optimization process is outlined in Algo-
rithm 1. It closely parallels standard gradient-based optimization
methods but incorporates specific adjustments to align with the
manifold.
In Line 2, the gradient computation in manifold optimization
involves a manifold tangent projection in comparison to standard
gradient computation. Specifically, for our quaternion constraint,
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 7 ===
9:6
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
Fig. 4. This scene illustrates the simulation of a woven fabric undergoing progressive stretching and eventual rupture using our method. With only 165K
particles, our approach effectively captures the realistic behavior of yarn-level cloth and the phenomenon of fabric tearing, demonstrating a convincing
rupture process and rich details at the tear propagation. Compared to current explicit methods, our technique achieves a threefold acceleration.
the gradient grad f is calculated as
gradp f = gradp ¯f
(18)
gradq f = (I −qqT ) gradq ¯f ,
(19)
where the subscript p refers to the R3 space and the subscript q
refers to the S3 space.
Line 6 is analogous to the line search and stepping procedures
within standard gradient-based optimization. In standard gradient-
based optimization, we employ direct addition to perform line
searches and steps, which may lead to the system’s state leaving
the manifold. In contrast, manifold optimization requires that the
corresponding line search and stepping be conducted on the man-
ifold, ensuring that every step within the search and step progres-
sion adheres to the constraints of the manifold. In particular, for
our quaternion constraints, once the descent direction is known,
we can ensure that the search and stepping remain on the mani-
fold by employing a line search along a geodesic on S3. For ele-
ment i with position pi and rotation qi, with a fast descent direc-
tion Δpi = −gradi
p f , Δqi = −gradi
q f , and step α, the stepping
on quaternion manifold is computed by
pinew = pi + αΔpi
(20)
qinew = qi cos ∥αΔqi ∥+
αΔqi
∥αΔqi ∥sin ∥αΔqi ∥.
(21)
In the line search procedure, this approach is adopted for the incre-
mental search of the system state. This same method is also applied
during the final iterative update step.
In Line 7, the q vector is guaranteed to lie on the manifold
through a normalization step. This step can be regarded as a man-
ifold projection and is given by
qi
k ←
qi
k
∥qi
k ∥.
(22)
It ensures that q satisfies the manifold constraint, allowing the op-
timization process to proceed effectively.
4.2
Second-Order Manifold Optimization
The second-order manifold optimization takes into account the
Hessian and gradient of the objective function f (x) on the man-
ifold M, and the algorithm steps are summarized in Algorithm 2.
ALGORITHM 2: Second-Order Manifold Optimization
Require: Initial guess x0, termination threshold ϵ
1: while true do
2:
Compute the grad f (xk) on the manifold M.
3:
if ∥grad f (xk)∥< ϵ then
4:
return xk ∈M
5:
end if
6:
Compute Hess f (xk) on the manifold M.
7:
Solve (Hess f (xk))Δx = grad f (xk) in tangent space TM.
8:
Use descent direction Δx with manifold line search step α
to update xk+1 ←xk + αΔx on the manifold M.
9:
Project xk+1 to the manifold M.
10:
k ←k + 1
11: end while
The computation of Hess f in Line 6 is performed using Propo-
sition 5.8 in the work of Boumal [2023], and the procedure is sum-
marized next:
Hesspi,pj f = Hesspi,pj ¯f
(23)
Hesspi,qj f = Hesspi,qj ¯f (I −qjqT
j )
(24)
Hessqi,pj f = (I −qiqT
i ) Hessqi,pj ¯f
(25)
Hessqi,qj f = (I −qiqT
i ) Hessqi,qj ¯f (I −qjqT
j )
(26)
+

0
i  j
−qT
i (gradqi ¯f )(I −qiqT
i )
i = j .
(27)
The symmetric nature of Hess f allows us to solve the large
sparse system using the commonly used preconditioned conjugate
gradient method. With manifold optimization, the constrained op-
timization problem is transformed into an unconstrained problem.
Even so, the unknowns of the system are still more than the true
degrees of freedom of the physical system. To overcome this is-
sue, we use the nullspace operator. Note that both the gradient
project operator P(q) = I −qqT and the nullspace operator G(q)
have the similar property P(q)q = 0 and G(q)q = 0 (detailed in-
troductions to these two operators are provided in Appendix A).
Here we use H = Hess f and b = grad f as shorthand nota-
tion. The original second-order solution formulation for rotation
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:7
(I −qqT )H(I −qqT )Δx = (I −qqT )b is reformulated as
G(q)TG(q)H(G(q)TG(q))Δx = G(q)TG(q)b.
(28)
By defining y = G(q)Δx and z = G(q)b, the original solution is
transformed to
G(q)HG(q)Ty = z.
(29)
The solution can then be expressed as Δx = G(q)Ty. This approach
reduces the number of unknowns in the system to the degrees of
freedom of the BDEM system and improves the solution efficiency.
5
Implementation Details
The utilization of optimization-based integrator formulation and
manifold optimization helps to develop an unconditionally sta-
ble integrator suited for implicit BDEM simulation with large
timesteps. The simulation workflow is summarized in Algorithm 3,
and the implementation details are explained in the following sub-
sections. The proposed methodology significantly improves the
stability and efficiency of BDEM simulations, enabling them to
tackle complex and computationally demanding scenes.
ALGORITHM 3: Stable Integrator
Require: timestep Δt, termination threshold ϵ
1: k ←0
2: Initial guess x0 ←xn + vnΔt
3: while true do
4:
Compute the grad f (xk) on the manifold M
5:
if ∥grad f (xk)∥< ϵ then
6:
xk+1 ←xk
7:
break
8:
end if
9:
Compute Hess f (xk) on the manifold M
10:
Project Hess f (xk) to semi-positive definite Hess
′ f (xk)
11:
Compute relative error ϵr
12:
Solve (Hess
′ f (xk))Δx = −grad f (xk) in tangent space TM
with preconditioned conjugate gradient method with rela-
tive error ϵr
13:
Use descent direction Δx with manifold line search step α
to update xk+1 ←xk + αΔx on the manifold M.
14:
Project xk+1 to the manifold M.
15:
k ←k + 1
16: end while
17: xn+1 ←xk+1.
18: vn+1 ←
1
Δt (xn+1 −xn)
19: Project vn+1 to friction cone
20: Update bond state with xn+1
5.1
Timestep Selection
In our research, the selection of timesteps for both implicit and ex-
plicit simulations requires careful consideration. For explicit simu-
lations, we must choose a timestep that is sufficiently large to per-
mit a reasonable comparison of efficiency. Regarding implicit simu-
lations, the timestep should be sufficiently increased to ensure sig-
nificant performance acceleration without excessively compromis-
ing the realism of the fragmentation effects. Taking into account
these factors, we have followed the approach established in explicit
BDEM for estimating the system’s period to inform our choice of
an appropriate timestep. In our prior work [Lu et al. 2021], the ap-
propriate timestep is ascertained by analyzing the system’s period
T, which correlates with the system’s largest eigenvalue λ as delin-
eated by the equation T = 2/
√
λ. The largest eigenvalue λ of the
system is calculated using the expression
λ = k
m N,
(30)
where m denotes the effective mass, k signifies the stiffness coeffi-
cient, and N corresponds to the maximum eigenvalue of the Lapla-
cian matrix representing the inter-bond connections. For a hexag-
onal arrangement, N ≈16. Additionally, the stiffness k is given by
k = kn ≈π
2 Er, with E representing the Young’s modulus and r
being the average radius of the elements.
For explicit simulation, our experimental findings indicate that
a timestep of 0.2T is the threshold that avoids numerical instabil-
ity and oscillations. This timestep is consistently applied across all
explicit simulation comparisons with implicit methods presented
in the text. Regarding implicit simulations, our optimization-based
method supports stable computations with large timesteps, poten-
tially allowing for one timestep per frame. However, increasing
the timestep can lead to more iterations in the Newton’s solver,
decreasing search efficiency. Beyond a certain point, the compu-
tational savings from increasing the timestep are not substantial.
Additionally, an overly large timestep may result in infrequent frac-
ture detection, which can impair the simulation’s accuracy. In our
experiments, we have found that a timestep ranging from 20 to 100
times the period T is reasonable.
5.2
Semi-Positive Definite Projection
The Hessian matrix on a manifold may not be semi-positive defi-
nite, which poses a significant challenge as it may lead to a wrong
search direction. To guarantee that the search direction is a cor-
rect descent direction, a semi-positive definite projection onto the
manifold is applied to our Hessian matrix. Similar regularization
treatments are also found in other methods [Li et al. 2020a].
5.3
Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
The preconditioned conjugate gradient method is employed to
efficiently solve large sparse symmetric systems of the form
Hess f (xk). Specifically, we employ an algebraic multigrid precon-
dition to facilitate fast and accurate solutions. Similar to the work
of Gast et al. [2015], the absolute error is not explicitly managed in
the beginning steps, and instead the relative error is taken as a ter-
mination criterion for the conjugate gradient method. This relative
error is calculated as
ϵr = min(0.5,

| grad f (xk)|).
(31)
The algebraic multigrid preconditioning in conjunction with the
relative error termination criterion lead to efficient and accurate
solutions for large sparse symmetric systems.
5.4
Collision Handling
In accordance with our optimization formulation, a variety of col-
lision handling methods can be seamlessly integrated into our
approach, including simple penalty-based methods and recently
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 9 ===
9:8
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
Table 1. Simulation Statistics for Our Experiments, with the Slow Motion of 1x Corresponding to One Frame Per 1/60th of a Second and 0.125x
Corresponding to One Frame Per 1/480th of a Second
Demo
N
E
Δt (explicit)
Δt (implicit)
Slow-Motion Scale
s/frame (explicit)
s/frame (implicit)
Speedup
Beam Stretch
19K
1E7
2.6E-5
0.016
1x
34.6
3.52
9.8
Beam Twist
19K
1E7
2.6E-5
0.0015
1x
34.6
14.76
2.3
Beam Drape
64K
1E9
1.7E-6
0.008
1x
2,230.9
711.7
3.1
Beam Drape
124K
1E6
4.4E-5
0.0024
1x
255.2
121.9
2.1
Chocolate
58K
1E9
4.4E-7
4.4e-5
0.125x
857.8
343.8
2.5
Plate
219K
1E9
3.5E-7
3.5e-5
0.125x
4,564.6
1,911.8
2.4
Cloth
165K
1E9
3.5E-7
1.74e-5
0.125x
1,299.6
394.2
3.3
The timestep and time consumption for the proposed approach are compared with explicit and implicit methods at different element numbers and stiffness settings.
Fig. 5. The figure, from left to right, illustrates the performance of the FEM, MPM, and our approach across varying scales. The upper, middle, and lower
rows represent the fracture behavior of the three methods under identical loads at different scales. It is observable that FEM exhibits completely distinct
fracture occurrences across the three scales. MPM shows similar fracture timings at medium and high scales but deviates at lower scales. In contrast, our
method consistently demonstrates fracture at the same load across all scales, indicating superior scale consistency.
utilized incremental potential contact [Li et al. 2020a]. However,
this work primarily focuses on fragmentation-related phenomena,
where the impact of the collision module on the fragmentation per-
formance is minimal and not the main emphasis here. Therefore,
we have employed a very simple treatment method for visually
acceptable simulation results.
Repulsion Term. A simple collision potential is introduced to
model repulsion between discrete elements and external objects.
Specifically, the potential includes two components: Vself, repre-
senting the repulsive forces between the discrete elements, and
Vexternal, representing the repulsive forces between the elements
and the external objects. The corresponding mathematical expres-
sions are
Vself = 1
2kec(∥pi −pj ∥−ri −rj)2
(32)
Vexternal = 1
2kc ∥д(pi)∇д(pi)∥2,
(33)
where kec denotes element collision stiffness, kc external collision
stiffness, pi and pj the positions of the discrete elements, and д the
signed distance function of the external objects. To ensure that the
collision term does not adversely affect the system’s computational
efficiency while maintaining a visually coherent outcome without
noticeable interpenetration, we have set the collision stiffness and
element collision stiffness to the order of Ermax, where E is the
max Young’s modulus of element and rmax is the max radius of
elements. In our experiments, this selection has minimal impact
on the system’s convergence rate and yields visually acceptable
simulation results.
Friction. Our approach for modifying the velocity and angular
velocity of an element in the post-collision process relies on an
explicit method. In the case of an external collision or self-collision,
the relative velocity vij and the relative angular velocity wij are
computed between element i and the external object j or another
element j, respectively, usingvij = vn+vt , wherevn andvt denote
the normal and tangential components of the relative velocity. To
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 10 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:9
calculate the modification of velocity and angular velocity, we use
the following equations:
Δvi = −min(1.0, μs
∥Fn∥Δt
mi ∥vt ∥)vt
(34)
Δwi = −min(1.0, μr
∥Fn∥r3
i Δt
Ii ∥wij ∥)wij.
(35)
Here, mi and Ii represent the mass and moment of inertia of ele-
menti, respectively, and μs and μr denote the coefficients of sliding
and rotation friction. For external collisions, Fn = kcд(pi)∇д(pi),
and for self-collisions, Fn = kec |∥pi −pj ∥−ri −rj | pi−pj
∥pi−pj ∥. Finally,
we project the modifications onto the direction of vi and wi, and
ensure that the magnitude of the modification does not exceed the
modulus of vi and wi. Therefore, the velocity and angular veloc-
ity can be modified to zero at most. The explicit friction treatment
method is evidently not sufficiently precise. In our experiments,
we observed that different timestep selections necessitated the use
of varying friction coefficients to achieve similar visual outcomes.
Smaller timesteps required a reduction in the friction coefficient,
whereas larger timesteps demanded an increase. However, since
the friction effect is not the focus of this article, we intend to em-
ploy a more accurate model in future work to obviate the need for
such parameter adjustments.
6
Results and Discussion
The performance of the proposed approach is evaluated through
a series of experiments. The simulations were conducted using an
Intel i7 13700K processor, and detailed experimental setups and
time costs are presented in Table 1. In all experiments, we have
employed the conventional particle fluid surface method for the
reconstruction and rendering of fracture surfaces.
6.1
Comparison with Rotation Vector Representation
In the field of rigid body motion simulation, the rotation vector
representation is commonly employed to compute the rotational
degrees of freedom. Compared to our method, the rotation vector
also upholds a computational size of six degrees of freedom. We
have conducted experimental comparisons between our motion
representation and the rotation vector-based motion formulation
from ADD [Geilinger et al. 2020]. Detailed experimental results
are presented in Figure 6. Utilizing the same BDEM potential, we
configured an identical three-point beam bending experiment and
set an equivalent dimensionless convergence threshold. Our exper-
iments revealed that the simulation outcomes were indistinguish-
able between the two methods; however, our algorithm achieved
faster convergence than the ADD approach. Theoretically, the ro-
tation vector representation introduces no constraints, suggesting
that our manifold-based search algorithm should exhibit a similar
convergence rate as the rotation vector. We preliminarily attribute
the enhanced performance of our algorithm to two factors: first,
the quaternion representation, which offers superior spatial inter-
polation properties favorable for search, and second, unlike our
energy minimization-based method, the ADD approach requires
the application of the Gauss-Newton method to solve the motion
equations, which may impose limitations on the convergence effi-
ciency to a certain extent.
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
0.0035
Δt (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Average Iterations
E = 109 - Our Method
E = 109 - Rotation Vector
E = 108 - Our Method
E = 108 - Rotation Vector
E = 107 - Our Method
E = 107 - Rotation Vector
E = 106 - Our Method
E = 106 - Rotation Vector
Fig. 6. We conducted a three-point beam bending experiment with iden-
tical settings for our method and rotation vector formulation from the
work of Geilinger et al. [2020]. The horizontal axis represents the timestep
size used in the simulation, with different colored curves corresponding to
various Young’s moduli values of the materials. The vertical axis denotes
the average number of iterations required during the simulation process.
The dashed lines in the figure represent the rotation vector formulation,
whereas the solid lines represent our approach. It is observable that, across
different timesteps and stiffness coefficients, our method needs fewer iter-
ations to achieve the same convergence criteria.
6.2
Comparison with Other Optimization Methods
To examine the performance of our proposed optimization ap-
proach, several experiments were conducted to assess its outcomes
against commonly used constrained optimization methods. The re-
sults of these experiments are presented in Figure 7, which shows
that our proposed approach outperforms commonly used con-
strained optimization methods.
Penalty Method. The penalty method uses an external potential
to convert a constrained optimization problem to an unconstrained
optimization problem:
arg min
x
Φ(x) + 1
2κ∥C(x)∥2.
(36)
This method is commonly used in constrained optimization due to
its simplicity. However, its shortcoming is that indefinite stiffness
is required to satisfy constraints, and the introduced external stiff-
ness κ can make the entire system an ill-defined problem. In our
experiments, we found that the penalty method failed to converge
or converged very slowly in BDEM fracture simulations.
Lagrange Multiplier. The Lagrange multiplier adds external vari-
ables λ to the system to convert the constrained optimization prob-
lem to an unconstrained one:
arg min
x,λ
Φ(x) + λTC(x).
(37)
One drawback of this method is the increase in the number of
variables and computational cost. The actual degrees of freedom
of rotation is 3, but the use of quaternions increases the number of
unknowns to 4. The addition of multipliers further increases the
number of variables to 5. As the number of unknowns increases,
the computational cost also increases. In our experiments, we
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 11 ===
9:10
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Number of Iterations
10−8
10−5
10−2
101
104
107
1010
Residual Norm
First-Order
Second-Order
Penalty
Lagrangian
Augmented
Fig. 7. Convergence rate comparison. The results show that the first-order
manifold optimization and the second-order manifold optimization are
both faster than the conventional constrained optimization methods, in-
cluding the penalty method and the Lagrange multiplier method.
found that the convergence rate was even slower than that of the
first-order manifold optimizer.
Augmented Lagrangian. The augmented Lagrangian method
can be seen as a combination of the penalty method and the La-
grange multiplier method, and it turns a constrained optimization
problem into an unconstrained one:
arg min
x,λ
Φ(x) + λTC(x) + 1
2κ∥C(x)∥2.
(38)
The external stiffness does not need to be infinite for the aug-
mented Lagrangian method. However, in our experiments, the con-
vergence rate was still lower than that of the manifold optimization
method.
6.3
Comparison with FEM and MPM
FEM and MPM are two prevalent techniques for simulating frag-
mentation. FEM has been utilized in real-time simulations [O’Brien
and Hodgins 1999; Parker and O’Brien 2009], whereas MPM can
simulate fracture through the continuum damage model [Fan et al.
2022; Wolper et al. 2019]. We have implemented the methodologies
presented in the work of Parker and O’Brien [2009] and Wolper
et al. [2019] as benchmarks for FEM and MPM, respectively, and
conducted two experiments for a detailed comparison: the three-
point bending test and the chocolate falling test. The three-point
bending experiment highlights the differences in scale consistency
among the three methods across various scales, and the chocolate
falling test illustrates the disparities of fragmentation under high-
velocity impacts.
To ensure a fair and comprehensive comparison, we provide
implementation details of the baseline methods used in our
experiments. For the MPM-based approach, we utilize the open
source phase field fracture model presented in the work of Wolper
et al. [2019]. Our FEM implementation is based on the method de-
scribed by Parker and O’Brien [2009], with several modifications
to enhance accuracy while maintaining computational efficiency.
We reintroduce the residual propagation and sequential separation
updating techniques from O’Brien and Hodgins [1999] to achieve
more precise fracture propagation. We remove the upper limit
on propagation steps, allowing for a more faithful representation
of the fracture process. Additionally, we eliminate the minimum
fracture piece size constraint of three elements to fully capture
the algorithm’s behavior. To maintain physical plausibility, we
implement an additional check to remove connections with floppy
hinge or ball joints, as suggested by Parker and O’Brien [2009].
This modified FEM implementation can be viewed as a simplified
version of O’Brien and Hodgins [1999], with the exclusion of
the remeshing process for individual tetrahedra. This strategic
simplification prevents an increase in tetrahedron count during
simulation while still capturing key aspects of fracture behavior.
The resulting baseline offers a balance between computational
efficiency and physical fidelity.
Three Point Bending. Scale consistency is crucial for artists dur-
ing the rapid prototyping phase of simulation, as it allows them
to experiment with parameters at a smaller scale, thereby avoid-
ing the time-consuming iteration associated with large-scale sim-
ulations. To analyze the scale consistency of our method in com-
parison to FEM and MPM, we conducted a three-point bending
experiment. This test is a standard for analyzing material prop-
erties, where the relationship between beam fracture and the ap-
plied load reveals the intrinsic characteristics of the material. As de-
picted in Figure 5, we selected discrete representations of the same
material for the three methods across three different scales. FEM
exhibits markedly different fracture events across scales. MPM
demonstrates similar fracture behavior at medium and high scales
but fails to accurately simulate fracture at smaller scales, with
varying fracture initiation frames across resolutions (see Table 2).
In contrast, our method maintains consistent fracture character-
istics across all scales, demonstrating superior scale consistency.
This consistency in our method arises from the discrete nature
of fracture phenomena, clearly evident in the comparison exper-
iment. Continuum approaches like FEM and MPM often struggle
to accurately model small crack patterns due to insufficient local
discretization, leading to resolution-dependent fracture initiation
times. As fracture originates from small cracks, these continuum
approaches may fail to capture the full complexity of the fracture
process, resulting in resolution-dependent crack patterns. Our dis-
crete method, however, inherently captures these small-scale inter-
actions, yielding more consistent behavior across different scales.
Chocolate Falling. The chocolate falling experiment was primar-
ily designed to demonstrate the distinctions in simulation out-
comes among the three methods under high-velocity impact con-
ditions. In the experiment, the chocolate was consistently dropped
onto a floor surface at a velocity of 5 m/s. The fracture results of
the three methods are presented in Figure 8. The baseline FEM
exhibits severe “shattering” artifacts. Extensive parameter tuning
yields either numerous tiny fragments or a few large pieces, failing
to produce the desired intermediate fragmentation pattern with di-
verse fragment sizes. Figure 9 presents a detailed visualization of
the damage phase field in MPM. While the MPM method captures
the continuum damage of materials, it has failed to demonstrate
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 12 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:11
Fig. 8. This figure, from left to right, demonstrates the fracture performance of FEM, MPM, and our method under the high-speed drop impact of a chocolate
object. The FEM resulted in an excessive fragmentation into minute pieces, whereas the MPM failed to produce a physically plausible fragmentation. In
contrast, BDEM accurately fragmented into a variety of piece sizes, effectively capturing the desired material failure behavior.
a plausible fragmentation process. This limitation stems from the
constraints of the phase field model, which necessitates the intro-
duction of additional artificial rules and parameters for artistic con-
trol over cracking and fragmentation within this scenario [Fan et al.
2022; Wolper et al. 2019]. While it is conceivable that the introduc-
tion of further supplementary rules might enhance the simulation
outcomes for this particular case, it is clear that such modifications
are extrinsic to the material’s fundamental properties. In contrast,
our method necessitates only the specification of material param-
eters to simulate the fracture phenomenon, thus achieving a real-
istic and authentic fragmentation effect.
Table 2 details the computational time costs and settings for
both experiments. The data reveals that BDEM achieves more con-
sistent fracture frames across resolutions compared to FEM and
MPM, indicating that fracture occurs at similar deformation states
and demonstrating superior scale consistency.
Per-frame computational costs indicate that FEM is the slow-
est method, requiring residual propagation for accurate crack
patterns, resulting in more iterations per step. While MPM has
lower per-frame computational costs than BDEM, its inferior scale
consistency necessitates extensive parameter tuning of material
strength and grid resolution to achieve satisfactory fracture results.
In contrast, BDEM simplifies this process significantly: suitable ma-
terial strength parameters can be rapidly determined at low reso-
lution and then applied directly to medium- and high-resolution
simulations with consistent results.
Analysis of fracture thresholds reveals an intriguing discrep-
ancy. Despite all three methods employing thresholds with iden-
tical physical dimensions, the numerical value for the FEM thresh-
old diverges significantly from the other two approaches. Notably,
this smaller threshold value in FEM aligns with parameters in
the original work by O’Brien and Hodgins [1999], whereas BDEM
and MPM thresholds more closely approximate real-world mate-
rial strengths.
6.4
Comparison with the Explicit Method
Beam Stretch and Twist. In our experiments, we compared the
simulation results of our implicit method with the explicit method
Fig. 9. A visualization of the damage profile with MPM. It is evident that,
with the correct material strength parameters applied, the chocolate ma-
terial exhibits damage effects under high-velocity impact conditions. How-
ever, this setting does not precipitate fracture, necessitating the introduc-
tion of further rules and controls to direct the fragmentation process. This
requirement highlights a limitation inherent to such continuum-based
methods, where additional rules are needed to simulate realistic behavior.
proposed in prior work [Lu et al. 2021]. Specifically, we evaluated
their performance in beam stretching and twisting scenarios, and
found that both methods produced identical results under the same
settings (Figure 10).
Beam Drape. This experiment investigates and compares the
simulation time of the implicit and explicit simulation methods us-
ing the beam drape scenario with different stiffness levels. Two
curves are plotted in Figure 11 to examine the relationship be-
tween simulation time and stiffness, as well as simulation time and
scale. Our results show that the implicit method outperforms the
explicit method by three to six times in terms of runtime. An ex-
periment comparing explicit and implicit methods for simulating
beam drape is shown in Figure 12.
Chocolate. In this experiment, the deformation of a chocolate
drop with high stiffness is simulated to evaluate the computational
efficiency between implicit and explicit simulation methods in rich
contact scenarios. The outcomes indicate that the implicit method
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 13 ===
9:12
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
Table 2. Simulation Statistics for Our Experiments, with the Slow Motion of 1x Corresponding to One Frame Per 1/60th of a Second and 0.125x
Corresponding to One Frame Per 1/480th of a Second
Scene
Method
# Points
Δt(s)
E
ν
τ
Time Per Frame (s)
Fracture Frame
Three Point Bending (Low)
FEM
578
4.2E-5
1E7
0.3
300
6.2
6
MPM
500
4.2E-5
1E7
0.3
3E4
0.6
26
Ours
532
2.0E-5
1E7
0.3
3E4
0.9
23
Three Point Bending (Middle)
FEM
1.7K
2.8E-5
1E7
0.3
300
57.6
13
MPM
2K
2.8E-5
1E7
0.3
3E4
5.2
23
Ours
1.8K
9.1E-6
1E7
0.3
3E4
7.3
25
Three Point Bending (High)
FEM
16.4K
2.0E-5
1E7
0.3
300
1240
29
MPM
20K
2.1E-5
1E7
0.3
3E4
48.2
11
Ours
18K
5.8E-5
1E7
0.3
3E4
137.1
25
Chocolate Falling (0.125x slow motion)
FEM
13.6K
5.2E-6
1E8
0.3
100
650.1
–
MPM
20K
4.2E-6
1E8
0.3
5E4
24.5
–
Ours
22K
4.4E-5
1E8
0.3
5E4
106.8
–
The timestep and time consumption for the proposed approach are compared with explicit and implicit methods at different element numbers and stiffness settings.
Fig. 10. Comparison of explicit (blue) and implicit (red) methods in simu-
lating a stretched and twisted beam. Both approaches yield similar results.
outperforms the explicit method by achieving a 2.5x speedup. The
visualization of the simulation can be inspected in Figure 2.
Plate. This experiment compares the computational efficiency
of implicit and explicit methods for simulating the fracture of a
plate with high stiffness upon impact with the ground. Our method
has demonstrated a 2.4x increase in computational speed relative
to the explicit method under these conditions. The simulation re-
sults are illustrated in Figure 3.
Cloth. Here we examine the computational efficiency of implicit
versus explicit methods in the context of yarn-level cloth simula-
tion, characterized by high tensile and low bending stiffness of the
yarns. Our method provides a 3.3x computational speed advantage
over the explicit approach under these circumstances. The dynam-
ics of the cloth tearing, as simulated, are depicted in Figure 4.
7
Conclusion
We presented an optimization-based implicit integrator for the
BDEM system, and introduced a manifold optimization scheme
to transform the nonlinear dynamic simulation into an uncon-
strained optimization problem on a spherical manifold, which
significantly improves the solution stability and efficiency. In
105
106
107
108
109
Stiffness
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Simulation Time Per Frame (s)
Beam Drape Implicit
Beam Drape Explicit
Fig. 11. This experiment compares explicit and implicit methods for sim-
ulating beam drape. The left images illustrate static drape scenarios with
varying material stiffness: red (109), yellow (108), green (107), and blue (106).
The curves in the right image plot the relationship between computational
cost and material stiffness, demonstrating that implicit methods produce
faster results for a range of stiffness values.
addition, a nullspace operator was proposed, which simplifies the
optimization procedure and reduces the number of unknowns. As
well, our new implicit BDEM approach uses the semi-positive def-
inite projection method with preconditioned conjugate gradient
and line search method on the manifold, which achieves a stable
integrator. In our experiments, we showcased that our method
surpasses the explicit BDEM in terms of computational speed.
Furthermore, when compared to FEM and MPM for fragmenta-
tion, our approach exhibits superior scale consistency, accurately
simulating fracture effects at smaller scales. The simulation of
fragmentation is more realistic and natural with our method,
which necessitates only the provision of material parameters to
get the authentic fracture process.
While our approach offers notable advancements, it is not
without its limitations. Specifically, to mitigate complexities
at the contribution points, we utilized a rudimentary collision
model for collision management. This simplification may lead to
a diminished fidelity in the representation of collision effects. In
future work, we plan to integrate more sophisticated collision
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 14 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:13
103
104
105
106
Number of Particles
10−1
100
101
102
103
104
Simulation Time Per Frame (s)
Beam Drape Implicit
Beam Drape Explicit
Fig. 12. This experiment compares explicit and implicit methods for simu-
lating beam drape. The curves plot the relationship between the computa-
tional cost and simulated discrete elements, showing that implicit meth-
ods significantly outperform explicit methods for finer simulation scales.
models into our optimization framework to enhance the accuracy
and realism of our simulations. Furthermore, the BDEM system
we developed is highly amenable to parallelization. Although our
current exposition does not delve into the details of GPU acceler-
ation for the sake of a clear computational comparison, we intend
to explore a more detailed implementation of parallel acceleration
in our methods moving forward. Additionally, while our approach
successfully captures fine-grained collision details, the reconstruc-
tion and rendering of fracture surfaces also play a crucial role in
the final visual outcomes. We aim to explore fracture surface recon-
struction methods more tailored to the nuances of BDEM in our
ongoing research.
References
Iván Alduán, Angel Tena, and Miguel A. Otaduy. 2009. Simulation of high-resolution
granular media. In Proceedings of the Spanish Computer Graphics Conference (CEIG
’09). 11–18.
Damien André, Ivan Iordanoff, Jean-luc Charles, and Jérôme Néauport. 2012. Discrete
element method to simulate continuous material by using the cohesive beam
model. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 213 (2012), 113–
125.
Zhaosheng Bao, Jeong-Mo Hong, Joseph Teran, and Ronald Fedkiw. 2007. Fracturing
rigid materials. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 2
(2007), 370–378.
David Baraff. 1989. Analytical methods for dynamic simulation of non-penetrating
rigid bodies. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques. 223–232.
David Baraff and Andrew Witkin. 1998. Large steps in cloth simulation. In Proceedings
of the 25th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
(SIGGRAPH ’98). 43–54.
Nathan Bell, Yizhou Yu, and Peter J. Mucha. 2005. Particle-based simulation of granu-
lar materials. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium
on Computer Animation. 77–86.
Jan Bender, Kenny Erleben, and Jeff Trinkle. 2014. Interactive simulation of rigid body
dynamics in computer graphics. Computer Graphics Forum 33 (2014), 246–270.
Miklós Bergou, Max Wardetzky, Stephen Robinson, Basile Audoly, and Eitan Grin-
spun. 2008. Discrete elastic rods. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 Papers. ACM, 1–12.
Peter Betsch and Ralf Siebert. 2009. Rigid body dynamics in terms of quaternions:
Hamiltonian formulation and conserving numerical integration. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 79, 4 (2009), 444–473.
Sofien Bouaziz, Sebastian Martin, Tiantian Liu, Ladislav Kavan, and Mark Pauly. 2014.
Projective dynamics. ACM Transactions on Graphics 33, 4 (2014), 1–11.
Nicolas Boumal. 2023. An Introduction to Optimization on Smooth Manifolds. Cam-
bridge University Press. https://www.nicolasboumal.net/book
Wei Chen, Fei Zhu, Jing Zhao, Sheng Li, and Guoping Wang. 2018. Peridynamics-
based fracture animation for elastoplastic solids. Computer Graphics Forum 37
(2018), 112–124.
Yu Ju Chen, Uri M. Ascher, and Dinesh K. Pai. 2017. Exponential Rosenbrock-Euler
integrators for elastodynamic simulation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 24, 10 (2017), 2702–2713.
Zhili Chen, Miaojun Yao, Renguo Feng, and Huamin Wang. 2014. Physics-inspired
adaptive fracture refinement. ACM Transactions on Graphics 33, 4 (2014), 1–7.
Floyd M. Chitalu, Qinghai Miao, Kartic Subr, and Taku Komura. 2020. Displacement-
correlated XFEM for simulating brittle fracture. Computer Graphics Forum 39
(2020), 569–583.
P. A. Cundall. 1971. A computer model for simulating progressive, large-scale move-
ment in blocky rock system. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Rock
Mechanics.
P. A. Cundall and O. D. L. Strack. 1979. A discrete numerical model for granular as-
semblies. Géotechnique 29, 1 (1979), 47–65.
David N. De Klerk, Thomas Shire, Zhiwei Gao, Andrew T. McBride, Christopher J.
Pearce, and Paul Steinmann. 2022. A variational integrator for the discrete ele-
ment method. Journal of Computational Physics 462 (2022), 111253.
Bernhard Eberhardt, Olaf Etzmuß, and Michael Hauth. 2000. Implicit-explicit schemes
for fast animation with particle systems. In Computer Animation and Simulation
2000. Eurographics. Springer, 137–151.
Linxu Fan, Floyd M. Chitalu, and Taku Komura. 2022. Simulating brittle fracture with
material points. ACM Transactions on Graphics 41, 5 (2022), 1–20.
Zachary Ferguson, Minchen Li, Teseo Schneider, Francisca Gil-Ureta, Timothy Lan-
glois, Chenfanfu Jiang, Denis Zorin, Danny M. Kaufman, and Daniele Panozzo.
2021. Intersection-free rigid body dynamics. ACM Transactions on Graphics 40, 4
(2021), 1–16.
Marco Fratarcangeli, Valentina Tibaldo, and Fabio Pellacini. 2016. Vivace: A practical
Gauss-Seidel method for stable soft body dynamics. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics 35, 6 (2016), 1–9.
Theodore F. Gast, Craig Schroeder, Alexey Stomakhin, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Joseph M.
Teran. 2015. Optimization integrator for large time steps. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 21, 10 (2015), 1103–1115.
Moritz
Geilinger,
David
Hahn,
Jonas
Zehnder,
Moritz
Bächer,
Bernhard
Thomaszewski, and Stelian Coros. 2020. ADD: Analytically differentiable
dynamics for multi-body systems with frictional contact. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 39, 6 (2020), 1–15.
David Hahn and Chris Wojtan. 2015. High-resolution brittle fracture simulation with
boundary elements. ACM Transactions on Graphics 34, 4 (2015), 1–12.
David Hahn and Chris Wojtan. 2016. Fast approximations for boundary element based
brittle fracture simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 35, 4 (2016), 1–11.
James K. Hahn. 1988. Realistic animation of rigid bodies. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer
Graphics 22, 4 (1988), 299–308.
Jeffrey Hellrung, Andrew Selle, Arthur Shek, Eftychios Sifakis, and Joseph Teran. 2009.
Geometric fracture modeling in Bolt. In SIGGRAPH 2009: Talks. ACM, 1.
Gentaro Hirota, Susan Fisher, A State, Chris Lee, and Henry Fuchs. 2001. An implicit
finite element method for elastic solids in contact. In Proceedings of the 14th Con-
ference on Computer Animation. IEEE, 136–254.
Couro Kane, Jerrold E. Marsden, Michael Ortiz, and Matthew West. 2000. Variational
integrators and the Newmark algorithm for conservative and dissipative mechan-
ical systems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 49, 10
(2000), 1295–1325.
Ioannis Karamouzas, Nick Sohre, Rahul Narain, and Stephen J. Guy. 2017. Implicit
crowds: Optimization integrator for robust crowd simulation. ACM Transactions
on Graphics 36, 4 (2017), 1–13.
Peter Kaufmann, Sebastian Martin, Mario Botsch, Eitan Grinspun, and Markus Gross.
2009. Enrichment textures for detailed cutting of shells. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2009
Papers. ACM, 1–10.
Min Hyung Kee, Kiwon Um, HyunMo Kang, and JungHyun Han. 2023. An
optimization-based SPH solver for simulation of hyperelastic solids. Computer
Graphics Forum 42 (2023), 225–233.
Dan Koschier, Jan Bender, and Nils Thuerey. 2017. Robust eXtended finite elements
for complex cutting of deformables. ACM Transactions on Graphics 36, 4 (2017),
1–13.
Dan Koschier, Sebastian Lipponer, and Jan Bender. 2014. Adaptive tetrahedral meshes
for brittle fracture simulation. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Ani-
mation, Vol. 3.
Tassilo Kugelstadt and Elmar Schömer. 2016. Position and orientation based Cosserat
rods. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Animation. 169–178.
Lei Lan, Yin Yang, Danny Kaufman, Junfeng Yao, Minchen Li, and Chenfanfu Jiang.
2021. Medial IPC: Accelerated incremental potential contact with medial elastics.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 40, 4 (2021), 1–16.
Minchen Li, Zachary Ferguson, Teseo Schneider, Timothy R. Langlois, Denis Zorin,
Daniele Panozzo, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Danny M. Kaufman. 2020a. Incremental
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 15 ===
9:14
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
potential contact: Intersection-and inversion-free, large-deformation dynamics.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 4 (2020), 1–20.
Minchen Li, Ming Gao, Timothy Langlois, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Danny M. Kaufman.
2019. Decomposed optimization time integrator for large-step elastodynamics.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 38, 4 (2019), 1–10.
Minchen Li, Danny M. Kaufman, and Chenfanfu Jiang. 2020b. Codimensional incre-
mental potential contact. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04457 (2020).
C. Karen Liu and Sumit Jain. 2012. A Quick Tutorial on Multibody Dynamics. Online
Tutorial. Georgia Institute of Technology.
Tiantian Liu, Adam W. Bargteil, James F. O’Brien, and Ladislav Kavan. 2013. Fast sim-
ulation of mass-spring systems. ACM Transactions on Graphics 32, 6 (2013), 1–7.
Tiantian Liu, Sofien Bouaziz, and Ladislav Kavan. 2016. Towards real-time simulation
of hyperelastic materials. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07378 (2016).
Fabian Löschner, Andreas Longva, Stefan Jeske, Tassilo Kugelstadt, and Jan Bender.
2020. Higher-order time integration for deformable solids. Computer Graphics Fo-
rum 39 (2020), 157–169.
Jia-Ming Lu, Chen-Feng Li, Geng-Chen Cao, and Shi-Min Hu. 2021. Simulating frac-
tures with bonded discrete element method. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 28, 12 (2021), 4810–4824.
Sebastian Martin, Bernhard Thomaszewski, Eitan Grinspun, and Markus Gross. 2011.
Example-based elastic materials. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Papers. ACM, 1–8.
Dominik L. Michels, Gerrit A. Sobottka, and Andreas G. Weber. 2014. Exponential
integrators for stiff elastodynamic problems. ACM Transactions on Graphics 33, 1
(2014), 1–20.
Neil Molino, Zhaosheng Bao, and Ron Fedkiw. 2004. A virtual node algorithm for
changing mesh topology during simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 23, 3
(2004), 385–392.
Matthias Müller and Nuttapong Chentanez. 2011. Solid simulation with oriented par-
ticles. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Papers. ACM, 1–10.
Matthias Müller, Nuttapong Chentanez, and Tae-Yong Kim. 2013. Real time dynamic
fracture with volumetric approximate convex decompositions. ACM Transactions
on Graphics 32, 4 (2013), 1–10.
Matthias Müller, Miles Macklin, Nuttapong Chentanez, Stefan Jeschke, and Tae-Yong
Kim. 2020. Detailed rigid body simulation with extended position based dynamics.
Computer Graphics Forum 39 (2020), 101–112.
Matthias Müller, Leonard McMillan, Julie Dorsey, and Robert Jagnow. 2001. Real-time
simulation of deformation and fracture of stiff materials. In Proceedings of the 2001
Workshop on Computer Animation and Simulation (Eurographics ’01). 113–124.
Rahul Narain, Matthew Overby, and George E. Brown. 2016. ADMM⊆projective dy-
namics: Fast simulation of general constitutive models. In Proceedings of the Sym-
posium on Computer Animation, Vol. 1.
Matthieu Nesme, Paul G. Kry, Lenka Jeřábková, and François Faure. 2009. Preserving
topology and elasticity for embedded deformable models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2009
Papers. ACM, 1–9.
Vinh D. X. Nguyen, A. Kiet Tieu, Damien André, Lihong Su, and Hongtao Zhu. 2021.
Discrete element method using cohesive plastic beam for modeling elasto-plastic
deformation of ductile materials. Computational Particle Mechanics 8 (2021), 437–
457.
James F. O’Brien and Jessica K. Hodgins. 1999. Graphical modeling and animation of
brittle fracture. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH ’99). 137–146.
Eric G. Parker and James F. O’Brien. 2009. Real-time deformation and fracture in a
game environment. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Sym-
posium on Computer Animation. 165–175.
Mark Pauly, Richard Keiser, Bart Adams, Philip Dutré, Markus Gross, and Leonidas J.
Guibas. 2005. Meshless animation of fracturing solids. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 24, 3 (2005), 957–964.
Tobias Pfaff, Rahul Narain, Juan Miguel De Joya, and James F. O’Brien. 2014. Adaptive
tearing and cracking of thin sheets. ACM Transactions on Graphics 33, 4 (2014), 1–
9.
David O. Potyondy and P. A. Cundall. 2004. A bonded-particle model for rock. Inter-
national Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 41, 8 (2004), 1329–1364.
Saty Raghavachary. 2002. Fracture generation on polygonal meshes using Voronoi
polygons. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2002 Conference Abstracts and Applications. ACM,
187–187.
Witawat Rungjiratananon, Zoltan Szego, Yoshihiro Kanamori, and Tomoyuki Nishita.
2008. Real-time animation of sand-water interaction. Computer Graphics Forum
27 (2008), 1887–1893.
Sara C. Schvartzman and Miguel A. Otaduy. 2014. Fracture animation based on high-
dimensional Voronoi diagrams. In Proceedings of the 18th Meeting of the ACM
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games. 15–22.
Eftychios Sifakis, Kevin G. Der, and Ronald Fedkiw. 2007. Arbitrary cutting
of deformable tetrahedralized objects. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation. 73–80.
Carlota Soler, Tobias Martin, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. 2018. Cosserat rods with
projective dynamics. Computer Graphics Forum 37 (2018), 137–147.
Ari Stern and Eitan Grinspun. 2009. Implicit-explicit variational integration of highly
oscillatory problems. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 7, 4 (2009), 1779–1794.
David E. Stewart. 2000. Rigid-body dynamics with friction and impact. SIAM Review
42, 1 (2000), 3–39.
Jonathan Su, Craig Schroeder, and Ronald Fedkiw. 2009. Energy stability and frac-
ture for frame rate rigid body simulations. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation. 155–164.
Pascal Volino and Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann. 2001. Comparing efficiency of inte-
gration methods for cloth simulation. In Proceedings: Computer Graphics Inter-
national 2001. IEEE, 265–272.
Huamin Wang and Yin Yang. 2016. Descent methods for elastic body simulation on
the GPU. ACM Transactions on Graphics 35, 6 (2016), 1–10.
Stephanie Wang, Mengyuan Ding, Theodore F. Gast, Leyi Zhu, Steven Gagniere, Chen-
fanfu Jiang, and Joseph M. Teran. 2019. Simulation and visualization of ductile
fracture with the material point method. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques 2, 2 (2019), 1–20.
Marcel Weiler, Dan Koschier, and Jan Bender. 2016. Projective fluids. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Motion in Games. 79–84.
Martin Wicke, Daniel Ritchie, Bryan M. Klingner, Sebastian Burke, Jonathan R.
Shewchuk, and James F. O’Brien. 2010. Dynamic local remeshing for elastoplastic
simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 29, 4 (2010), 1–11.
Chris Wojtan and Greg Turk. 2008. Fast viscoelastic behavior with thin features. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 Papers. ACM, 1–8.
Joshuah Wolper, Yunuo Chen, Minchen Li, Yu Fang, Ziyin Qu, Jiecong Lu, Meggie
Cheng, and Chenfanfu Jiang. 2020. AnisoMPM: Animating anisotropic damage
mechanics. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 4 (2020), 1–16.
Joshuah Wolper, Yu Fang, Minchen Li, Jiecong Lu, Ming Gao, and Chenfanfu Jiang.
2019. CD-MPM: Continuum damage material point methods for dynamic fracture
animation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 38, 4 (2019), 1–15.
Yonghao Yue, Breannan Smith, Peter Yichen Chen, Maytee Chantharayukhonthorn,
Ken Kamrin, and Eitan Grinspun. 2018. Hybrid grains: Adaptive coupling of dis-
crete and continuum simulations of granular media. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics 37, 6 (2018), 1–19.
Changxi Zheng and Doug L. James. 2010. Rigid-body fracture sound with precom-
puted soundbanks. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Papers. ACM, 1–13.
Yufeng Zhu, Robert Bridson, and Chen Greif. 2015. Simulating rigid body fracture
with surface meshes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 34, 4 (2015), 1–11.
Appendices
A
Quaternion Operations
Quaternions are generally represented in the following form:
q = ui + vj + wk + s = {u,v,w,s} =
			

u
v
w
s


,
(39)
where u, v, w, and s are real numbers, and 1, i, j, and k are the
basis vectors or basis elements. A unit quaternion can denote a
rotation in 3D space. Compared to other forms of rotation repre-
sentations, such as Euler angles, axis-angle, and rotation matrices,
quaternions have advantages in computational simplicity and effi-
ciency. Hence, quaternions are widely used in computer graphics
to represent rotation, including BDEM [Lu et al. 2021], where they
are used to describe the rotational status of discrete elements. As
quaternions play a key role in formulating the proposed implicit
BDEM, we briefly recap the key information related to quaternion
operations in this section.
Quaternion Multiplication. The multiplication of quaternions
represents the composition of rotations: the left multiplication rep-
resents the order of rotations, and the right multiplication repre-
sents the subsequent rotation of the coordinate system. Rotations
can also be represented in the matrix form with quaternions:
qiqj = Ql(qi)qj = Qr (qj)qi,
(40)
where Ql(q) is called the left multiplication matrix and Qr (q) the
right multiplication matrix. Letting vector t = {u,v,w} denote the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 16 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:15
imaginary part of quaternion {u,v,w,s}, the left and right multi-
plication matrices can be expressed as follows:
Ql(q) =
sI3 + t×
t
−tT
s

(41)
Qr (q) =
sI3 −t×
t
−tT
s

,
(42)
where the skew symmetric matrix t× is the cross matrix of vector
t :
t× = 	

0
−w
v
w
0
−u
−v
u
0


.
(43)
Direction Rotation Operator. Letting d0 denote a direction in the
3D space, the new direction d after a rotation can be expressed as
d
0

= q
d0
0

q,
(44)
where quaternion q denotes the rotation and q = {−u, −v, −w,s}
is its conjugate. The preceding rotation operation can be rewritten
as
d = q ⊙d0,
(45)
where ⊙is the direction rotation operator.
Nullspace Operator. The composition of a quaternion its and con-
jugate is the unit quaternion, i.e., qq = {0, 0, 0, 1}. In the matrix
form, this becomes
qq = Ql(q)q =
sI3 −t×
−t
tT
s
 t
s

=
			

0
0
0
1


.
(46)
We can define the upper matrix of Ql(q) as a nullspace operator:
Gl(q) = sI3 −t×
−t ,Gr (q) = sI3 + t×
−t .
(47)
The nullspace operator can be used to reduce the computational
cost of quaternion systems, and the detailed strategy is provided
in Section 4.2. With the nullspace operator, the following relations
hold:
Gl(q)q = 0,Gr (q)q = 0,
(48)
and
Gl(q)TGl(q) = |q|2I4 −qqT ,
Gl(q)Gl(q)T = |q|2I3.
(49)
The multiplicationGl(qi)qj removes the component ofqi inqj and
projects the vector to the direction of angle axis of quaternionqiqj.
The quaternion matrix can also be related to the nullspace operator
matrix as
Ql(q) =

Gl(q)T
q

,Qr (q) =

Gr (q)T
q

.
(50)
Derivation and Angular Velocity. Let w4 denote the angular ve-
locity in four dimensions:
w4 =
w
0

.
(51)
The derivative of a quaternion and the extended angular velocity
w4 satisfy the following relations [Betsch and Siebert 2009]:
q = 1
2w4q,
(52)
w4 = 2qq.
(53)
Quaternion Constraint. A rotation can be represented by a unit
quaternion. To ensure the quaternion remains as a unit during cal-
culations, the unit constraint must be applied:
C(q) = 1
2(qTq −1) = 0.
(54)
B
Hamiltonian System with Backward Euler
Formulation
We present a derivation of the kinetic equation for rotational
systems using a conventional approach: first establishing the
continuous formulation, then applying a time discretization
method to obtain the integrator form. As described by Betsch and
Siebert [2009], the continuous form of the Hamiltonian system
equation is given by
q = 1
4

J−1
0 (q · p)q + G(q)T J−1G(q)p

,
p = −1
4

J−1
0 (q · p)p + G(p)T J−1G(p)q

−∇V (q),
(55)
where q represents the rotational state, p denotes the extended
momentum, and J0 = tr(J). Given the quaternion unit length
constraint with property q · p = 0 [Betsch and Siebert 2009], we
can simplify the equation to
q = 1
4

G(q)T J−1G(q)p

p = −1
4

G(p)T J−1G(p)q

−∇V (q).
(56)
For a spherical element, J = 2
5mr2I3. Let I = 2
5mr2. Applying the
result from Equation (49), we further simplify the equation:
q = 1
4I

(I4 −qqT )p

,
p = −1
4I

|p|2I4 −ppT 
q −∇V (q).
(57)
Maintaining q · p = 0, we obtain a more concise form:
q = 1
4Ip
p = −1
4I |p|2q −∇V (q).
(58)
Integrating the first equation into the second and simplifying, we
derive an equation solely in terms of q:
4I(q + | q|2q) + ∇V (q) = 0.
(59)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 17 ===
9:16
•
J.-M. Lu et al.
Note the new term | q|2q, which distinguishes this formulation
from non-rotational cases. To align with our manifold optimiza-
tion approach, we left-multiply by (I4 −qqT ). Since (I4 −qqT )q = 0,
the residual on the manifold becomes
(I4 −qqT )(4Iq + ∇V (q)) = 0.
(60)
Observe that 4Iq + ∇V (q) and 4I(q + | q|2q) + ∇V (q) yield identical
residuals on the manifold. Consequently, we can employ the
simpler form, and discretization using backward Euler results in
the same expression as in Equation (5).
C
Discrete Lagrangian
Hamilton’s principle is a fundamental relation in physics to de-
scribe the motion of a dynamic system. By taking the variation of
the Lagrangian functional S =
∫t1
t0 L(x(t), x(t))dt, the equations of
motion can be obtained as the stationary point of the action func-
tional. For our system, the Lagrangian function given by the sum
of the kinetic energy T and the potential energy V :
L(x, x) = T(x, x) −V (x, x) = 1
2 xT M x −V (x).
(61)
The true evolution of the physical system satisfies
∂S
∂x(t) = 0. For
quaternion-based Hamiltonian system, we can articulate the equa-
tions within which the extended kinetic energy form is derivable
from Betsch and Siebert [2009]:
T(q, q) = qT Mq(q)q.
(62)
Here, for one element, Mq(q) = 4Gl(q)JGl(q)T + 2tr(J)qqT , J is
the moment of inertia matrix and Gl(q) is the nullspace operator
in Appendix A. Given that the mass matrix Mq(q) varies with q,
direct differentiation of the equations yields a form akin to the ex-
tended momentum in rigid body motion, which is complicated for
the derivation of an incremental potential form. In this context, we
employ the Discrete Lagrangian formulation to re-derive the equa-
tions and perform simplifications based on some special properties
of the BDEM.
In a small time interval, the action functional can be approxi-
mated by a discrete Lagrangian:
Sd =
n−1

i=0
Ld(ti,ti+1,xi,xi+1) ≈
∫tn
t0
L(t,x(t))dt.
(63)
At the stationary point of the preceding discrete action functional,
each term of the sum must be set to zero:
∂Sd
∂xi
= 0 = ∂Ld(ti−1,ti,xi−1,xi)
∂xi
+ ∂Ld(ti,ti+1,xi,xi+1)
∂xi
.
(64)
Here, with mid-point approximation,
Td(xi,vi) = ΔtT
xi+1 + xi
2
, xi+1 −xi
Δt

Vd(xi) = ΔtV
xi+1 + xi
2

.
(65)
While this formulation is general for any element shape, our
BDEM system employs spherical discrete elements exclusively.
This choice allows us to leverage the symmetry properties of
spheres, significantly simplifying the computational process. It is
important to note that these optimizations are specific to spherical
elements and do not apply to other geometries.
For a sphere with mass m and radius r, the mass matrix Mp =
mI3, whereas its moment of inertia is J =
2
5mr2I3, and here I3
stands for the 3 × 3 identity matrix. With vector p denoting its po-
sition and quaternionq its rotation, the discrete energy term for po-
sition can be easily computed with linear velocity approximation:
Tp
d = Δt 1
2
pi+1 −pi
Δt
T
mI3
pi+1 −pi
Δt

.
(66)
For rotation, we approximate the mass matrix and velocity by a
mid-point approximation:
T q
d = Δt 1
2
qi+1 −qi
Δt
T
Mq
qi+1 + qi
2
 qi+1 −qi
Δt

.
(67)
With the definition of extended matrix and moment of inertia for
sphere, we can get
Mq(q) = 4G(q)JG(q)T + 2tr(J)qqT
= 8
5mr2 
I4 −qqT 
+ 12
5 mr2qqT
= 8
5mr2

I4 + 1
2qqT

,
(68)
where I4 stands for the 4 × 4 identity matrix. With unit
length property of quaternion during our simulation, we
have (qi+1 + qi)T (qi+1 −qi) = qT
i+1qi+1 −qT
i qi = 0. With the
mid-point mass matrix as in the work of Betsch and Siebert [2009],
the discrete kinetic energy is
T q
d =
1
2Δt (qi+1 −qi)T Mq
 qi+1 + qi
2

(qi+1 −qi)
=
1
2Δt (qi+1 −qi)T 8
5mr 2

I4 + 1
2
qi+1 + qi
2
 qi+1 + qi
2
T 
(qi+1 −qi)
=
1
2Δt (qi+1 −qi)T 8
5mr 2I4(qi+1 −qi).
(69)
Now the mass matrix for quaternion becomes constant here. The
extended mass matrix Ms is
Ms =
mI3
8
5mr2I4

.
(70)
Concatenating positions and rotations for all elements as system
state x, the discrete kinetic energy of the spherical element can
be expressed as
Td = 1
2Δt
xi+1 −xi
Δt
T
Ms
xi+1 −xi
Δt

.
(71)
The discrete Lagrangian can be computed by
Ld(ti,ti+1,xi,xi+1) =Δt 1
2
xi+1 −xi
Δt
T
Ms
xi+1 −xi
Δt

−ΔtV
xi+1 + xi
2

,
(72)
and the terms in Equation (64) can be expressed as
∂Ld(ti−1,ti,xi−1,xi)
∂xi
= 1
Δt Ms(xi −xi−1) −1
2Δt∇V
xx−1 + xi
2

,
(73)
∂Ld(ti,ti+1,xi,xi+1)
∂xi
= 1
Δt Ms(xi −xi+1) −1
2Δt∇V
xi + xi+1
2

.
(74)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

=== PAGE 18 ===
Implicit Bonded Discrete Element Method with Manifold Optimization
•
9:17
Let ˆx = 2xi −xi−1, and the mid-point form of our variational
integrator can be obtained as
1
Δt2 Ms(xi+1−ˆx)+ 1
2∇V
xi+1 + xi
2

+ 1
2∇V
xi−1 + xi
2

= 0. (75)
Now we have developed a variational integrator for BDEM system
simulations. The following part outlines the derivation of our
optimization formulation, which forms the foundation of our
subsequent optimization process. We introduce a new variable
ˆz = ˆx −1
2M−1
s Δt2∇V ( xi−1+xi
2
), calculable from known previous
states. This allows us to reformulate the equation as
1
Δt2 Ms(xi+1 −ˆz) + 1
2∇V
xi+1 + xi
2

= 0.
(76)
Observing this equation, we can recast it as an optimization prob-
lem with the objective function:
Φ(xi+1) =
1
2Δt2 (xi+1 −ˆz)T Ms(xi+1 −ˆz) + V
xi+1 + xi
2

.
(77)
Received 21 August 2023; revised 15 October 2024; accepted 12 December
2024
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 44, No. 1, Article 9. Publication date: January 2025.

